# Pipes

## What are pipes ?

Put simply, pipes are commands in Linux which allow you to use the output of one command as the input of another.

Pipes **|** use the following format:

```bash
[command 1] | [command 2] | [command 3] ... | [command n]
```

There is no limit to the number of times you can chain pipes in a row!

In this lab, you'll take a closer look at how you can use pipes and filters to solve basic data processing problems.

## Combining commands

Let's start with a commonly used example. Recall the following commands:

- sort - sorts the lines of text in a file and displays the result
- uniq - prints a text file with any consecutive, repeated lines collapsed to a single line

With the help of the pipe operator, you can combine these commands to print all the unique lines in a file.

Suppose you have the file pets.txt with the following contents:

```bash
$ cat pets.txt
goldfish
dog
cat
parrot
dog
goldfish
goldfish
```

If you only use **sort** on **pets.txt**, you get:

```bash
$ sort pets.txt
cat
dog
dog
goldfish
goldfish
goldfish
parrot
```

The file is sorted, but there are duplicated lines of "dog" and "goldfish".

On the other hand, if you only use **uniq**, you get:

```bash
$ uniq pets.txt
goldfish
dog
cat
parrot
dog
goldfish
```

This time, you removed consecutive duplicates, but non-consecutive duplicates of "dog" and "goldfish" remain.

But by combining the two commands in the correct order - by first using **sort** then **uniq** - you get back:

```bash
$ sort pets.txt | uniq
cat
dog
goldfish
parrot
```

Since **sort** sorts all identical items consecutively, and **uniq** removes all consecutive duplicates, combining the commands prints only the unique lines from **pets.txt**!

## Applying a command t o strings and files

Some commands such as **tr** only accept standard input - normally text entered from your keyboard - but not strings or filenames.

- tr (translate) - replaces characters in input text

```bash
tr [OPTIONS] [target characters] [replacement characters]
```

In cases like this, you can use piping to apply the command to strings and file contents.

With strings, you can use echo in combination with **tr** to replace all the vowels in a string with underscores **_**:

```bash
$ echo "Linux and shell scripting are awesome\!" | tr "aeiou" "_"
L_n_x _nd sh_ll scr_pt_ng _r_ _w_s_m_!
```

To perform the complement of the operation from the previous example - or to replace all the consonants (any letter that is not a vowel) with an underscore - you can use the **-c** option:

```bash
$ echo "Linux and shell scripting are awesome\!" | tr -c "aeiou" "_"
_i_u__a_____e______i__i___a_e_a_e_o_e_
```

With files, you can use **cat** in combination with **tr** to change all of the text in a file to uppercase as follows:

```bash
$ cat pets.txt | tr "[a-z]" "[A-Z]"
GOLDFISH
DOG
CAT
PARROT
DOG
GOLDFISH
GOLDFISH
```

The possibilities are endless! For example, you could add **uniq** to the above pipeline to only return unique lines in the file, like so:

```bash
$ sort pets.txt | uniq | tr "[a-z]" "[A-Z]"
CAT
DOG
GOLDFISH
PARROT
```